in this lesson we will solve a very
simple problem given a number n which is
a natural number we want to find out all
its factors for example if n is let us
say 12 then its factors are 1 and 1
divides all natural numbers 2 3 4 6 and
12 so 12 has 6 factors in all these 6
numbers divide 12 ok so if we have n
equal to 17 we will have only 2 factors
1 and 17
that's because 17 is a prime number if n
is 36 then the factors would be 1 2 3 4
6 9 12 18 and 36 so there are 9 factors
of 36 so how do we solve this problem
programmatically the simplest approach
is trial division what we can do is we
can try dividing n by all numbers
starting 1 to n and find out all the
factors so algorithm would go like let's
say we start with an empty list named a
and then we run a loop starting 1 all
the way till n so for I starting 1 to n
if I divides N or in other words n
modulo I is 0 then we add I to list a so
once we exit this loop the list a has
all the factors of n now there is a
simple observation here a number is
always divided by 1 and itself apart
from 1 and itself the smallest factor
that it can have is 2 and the largest
factor that it can have will be n by 2
there would be no factor of n other than
n itself after N by 2 so we can improve
this algorithm a little here what we can
do is let's say instead of starting with
an empty list we start with
1 & n already in the list and then we
can run our loop through to two n by 2
we do not run the loop all the way till
n this is definitely better than running
loop till n now what will be the running
time of this algorithm we have a loop
running till n by 2 so the time taken is
proportional to n which in other words
we also say that this is Big O of n in
terms of time complexity can we do
something better than this well let's
see as we know and as we had discussed
in our previous lesson on parity testing
also if there is a number a that divides
number n then there is another number B
equal n by a that also divides n the
factors of a number always exist in pair
and we call them cofactors we always
have a relationship like a into B equal
n for example if we pick up the case of
36 here then if a is 1 then B is 36 by 1
which is 36 if a is 2 B would be 18 if a
is 3 B would be 12 if a is 4 B would be
9 and if a is 6 then B is also equal to
6 this happens only when a is square
root of n so in this case 6 is square
root of 36 so in the case when a is not
equal to B and let's say if is the
smaller one in the pair if a is less
than B then a is less than square root
of n and B is always greater than square
root of n and if a is equal to B like in
the case of 6 here then they are both
equal to square root of n we can use
this property to improve our algorithm
so what we can do now is we can again
start with an empty list and we can run
the loop from 1 to square root of n so
we say for I starting 1 to square root
of n if I divides N or if n modulo
I is 0 then we add I to list a and we
also add n upon I to list a so this will
be our a and this will be our B ok we
could have chosen to start with 1 and n
in the list initially only then we would
be running the loop starting too but if
we are running the loop starting 1 then
1 and n will also come into the list in
the loop itself now there still is one
issue with this code we have we have not
handled the case when a is equal to B so
when a is equal to B using this
algorithm we will add the factor twice
in the list so we need to do only a
little change to handle this all we need
to say that if I is not equal to square
root of n which will be the case when a
will be equal to B then only add n upon
I to list a as we know when and the
cofactors are equal then the factor is
square root of n now a couple of things
here
I have only written a pseudocode in an
actual program a can be an array or a
can be any other dynamic list available
in your language like vector in C++ when
we are adding the elements we are not
adding them in a sorted order so the
factors in the list will not appear in
an increasing order if we want a sorted
list then we need to do some
modifications to the algorithm to add
the factors in a sorted manner I leave
that as an exercise for you ok so what
will be the running time or the time
complexity of this algorithm we have a
loop running 1 to square root of n so
clearly the time taken here is
proportional to square root of n we have
just one loop running till square root
of n or in other words this is Big O of
square root of n in terms of Big O
notation the time complexity is big o of
square root of n Big O of square root of
n is a lot lot lot better than Big O of
n algorithm any
and algorithm so this was finding out
all the factors of a number in the next
lesson we will see algorithm to find out
prime factorization of a number so
thanks for watching